Acid Damage (affecting action). The attack causes acidic damage to the target, but there's also a special effect involved—if the victim fails some sort of check (morale, saving throw, percentile chance, ete) he takes some action in response to or as a result of the acid (usually either due to panie or pain). The most likely candidates for involuntary responses to acid are panic (running), losing actions (getting acid off your skin), dropping items, or something similar.
Acid Damage (causes condition). In addition to normal damage and collateral damage the  attack causes to equipment, the acid has a chance to put the victim into a particular combat condition—blindness being the most obvious, whether it's permanent or temporary. Other possibilities for such "special" acids might include: damaged sight resulting in combat penalties (but not complete blindness), a loss of charisma points, permanent scarring, or some other chemical reaction (perhaps this sort of acid turns re-grown skin blue, for example).
Acid Damage (hit or miss). The attack causes electrical damage, but a successful saving throw means that the target incurs no damage. In other words, the saving throw functions as a to-hit roll and if it is successful the attack missed. Another way of handling this is to require an attack roll for the attack itself (and then don't allow a saving throw). If the attack hits, items and equipment spattered with the acid are at great risk of damage (this is one of the signature features of acid as an attack form). Also, acid attacks often cause damage for more than one round.
Acid Damage (progressive). The victim takes acid damage, but continues to take damage in later combat rounds (probably a random number of rounds, but possibly a set number of rounds with declining damage each time - it's up to you). The continuing damage would almost certainly prevent spell casting, but might also create penalties on saving throws, attack rolls, and/or movement rate. Also, items spattered with the acid may be ruined. Progressive damage over several rounds (with attendant problems caused by pain) and the high likelihood of damaged equipment are the hallmarks of fantasy acid.
Acid Damage (save for half damage). The target takes half damage if he makes a successful saving throw; items he carries are also at risk of being destroyed by the acid. Generally, acid attacks are highly dangerous to items (even more so than fire attacks) and the effect lingers for more than a single combat round.
Adhesiveness and Friction. The special attack makes things stick to other things, or makes them slippery. This could be a magical power, a mental power, or it might be that the monster spits glue or oil. The obvious use of this power is to stick people in place, prevent them from moving, or make them drop (or unable to release) weapons. However, such an ability could also be used to give the monster extra mobility (if it slides), to haul opponents around (if the glue is at the end of a rope or tentacle), to attach dangerous things to other things, or as part of a characteristic trap the monster sets.
Affect Ground or Rock. This special attack can be used to open holes in the ground, collapse walls, cause the ground to grab people, etc. In many cases, only one particular kind of effect will be possible; the monster might be able to open cracks in the floor but not collapse walls, for example. Turning rock into mud (and back) is one interpretation of this sort of ability, and so is the use of a terrible roar to collapse ceilings.
Affect Metal. The monster can control metal (probably one specific type). This can include causing the metal to animate, affecting it as a magnet, making it rust, heating it up, chilling it to deadly low temperatures, causing it to conduct electricity, shaping it at will, making it brittle, changing its physical properties, causing it to constrict, some combination thereof
Affect Stone or Wood. This is likely a form of rapid corrosion, but it could also be the ability to cause tremors in the substance, heat/cool it, warp it, shape it, or otherwise use it to damage people.
Affect Use of a Limb. This special attack can sever, destroy, or immobilize one of the victim's limbs. If the special attack is delivered by touch, this is probably a tentacle, whip, or other "grabbing" type of attack (attacks that sever limbs should be left to the really dangerous and rare monsters). If the attack is delivered at a range (by a gaze attack, for example), this might represent partial paralysis, a partial flesh-to-stone, or a chemical change that doesn't affect the entire body.
Affect Wood. The monster can control living and/or dead wood, cause it to animate, affect it like a magnet, heat it up, chill it, cause it to conduct electricity, cause it to act like a vampiric bloodsucker, shape it at will, or some combination thereof. In many cases, the monster will have a single, specific thing it can do, although some more powerful monsters might have a generalized ability to animate and control wood.
Animate Objects. The monster can animate nearby objects to serve as allies. Consider a few of the following ideas: perhaps the monster makes a specific object and has these around for use - indeed, it may be that the creature can only animate a specific type of pre-prepared object. Some monsters might also be restricted to animating objects made of a certain substance, made during a certain time period, or made by a certain race.
Asphyxiation. This special attack removes or reduces the target's ability to breathe. It could be by pulling the victim underwater, by filling the victim's lungs with fluid, by choking the victim's neck, by suffocating the victim, by removing the victim's memory of how to breathe, by surrounding the victim with dust or smoke, or a variety of other methods. Death is not immediate, and the period of time required for the victim to die can be measured out in several ways: a set number of combat rounds, a random number of combat rounds, a number of combat rounds related to the victim's constitution score, a number of rounds related to the victim's level, or a series of saving throws until the victim finally succumbs. Don't worry if the character seems to be able to hold his breath for an incredibly long time - just assume that he manages to catch a gasp of air somehow during the process - the important thing is to make the attack work well as part of the game, not to simulate exactly how long a person can hold his breath.
Aversion. The special attack creates an aversion to something, often an aversion to animals related to the monster, or to situations involving the monster's normal surroundings. For example, a giant, intelligent beetle's special attack might cause an aversion to beetles or bugs. Or, if the beetle is a subterranean creature, the special attack might cause an aversion to darkness. A table of Aversions is also contained in a later book.
Bleeding and Healing. This sort of special attack either causes ongoing damage (probably from bleeding or bloodsucking, but possibly for other reasons such as caustic materials) or causes damage that doesn't heal in the normal fashion. Ongoing damage is probably for a random number of rounds, rolling damage again each round. A list of possibilities: bleeding caused by jagged wound, bleeding caused by blood-thinning chemical, magical nature of bite/claw, cursed nature of bite/claw, mild poison in bite/claw/stinger, chemical reaction continues until the catalyst is used up (like acid), or a substance continues burning or producing energy until it is used up. (Yes, I know the last two are technically the same thing). If the special attack causes damage that doesn't heal normally, there are a few possibilities: (1) the damage cannot be cured by magical healing and must be regained by normal rest, (2) the damage can only be cured by magical healing, (3) the damage cannot be cured without a specific spell to neutralize poison, remove curse, or dispel magic, whichever seems appropriate to the monster's nature.
Body Infestation. This special attack infests the victim's body with a plant or animal growth. The result might be extremely minor: "you have fleas," problematic, "flea bites are distracting you and causing you to attack at -1, or quite deadly, "an enormous flea is growing inside you: each round you attack at a cumulative -I to hit, and on round 10 you die unless cured." Vermin and fungi are the obvious candidates for this sort of attack, but this sort of attack would also include undead worms, growths that are contagious if the character gets too close to the other characters, and a variety of other possibilities. Conditions that worsen as time goes on work well with this sort of attack.
Bury. The attack buries the victim in some sort of substance, digs him down into the ground, or hauls up dirt and stone to cover him. Possible substances for a burial-type attack might include slime, ashes, gravel, plaster, hardening resin, rock, sand, and even water.
Charisma Loss. The attack drains one or more points of charisma from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the victim reaches a charisma score of 0 as a result of successive attacks, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker, or might remain alive as the attacker's mental slave. Another possibility is that the victim just dies, and a third possibility is that restoring the lost points becomes harder - what might have returned naturally is now a permanent condition requiring spells or divine intervention to reverse. Note that the drain might be temporary or permanent - this IS up to you as a matter of how powerful you want the monster to be. 
Cloud Vortex. Similar to the "Elemental" and " Energy," Vortex attacks, this is an attack in which the monster calls forth mist, smoke, steam, vapor, fog, or some other kind of gas in a whirlwind of power. The victim takes some damage from being hurled around, but the distinguishing feature is the effect of the substance being used for the vortex. It might be poisonous, might be choking, might be hot, might be cold, might conduct electricity, might dispel magic, or could have any number of other properties. The cloud probably lingers more than one combat round, possibly trapping its victims within, possibly moving from one victim to another, or possibly just remaining in one place as a potential obstacle during the rest of the combat. 
Clumsiness. Victim suffers one or more of the following: a penalty to hit, a penalty to armor class, inability or reduction in spell casting, and/or the chance to drop any items he is holding. Actual dexterity score is not necessarily affected. The way in which the attack causes clumsiness could include overloading one of the victim's emotions (joy, rage, hate, greed, fear); an alchemical reaction (mysterious chemicals in the creature's spittle); the aftereffects of an electrical shock; or a very weak poison, curse, or disease. The duration could range from only a couple of combat rounds to days in length.
Cold Damage (all or none). A blast of cold either hits or misses the target - this can be governed by an all-or-nothing saving throw, or it might be an attack for which the attacker needs to make a to-hit roll. Cold temperature normally wouldn't cause much collateral damage to items or equipment unless it is an unusually magical type of cold (perhaps affecting metal more than other substances, for example).
Cold Damage (manifestation). The special attack brings into being an abstract shape of pure coldness (serpentine, mist, etc). The manifestation causes cold damage (or makes a separate attack) each round for a set duration.
Cold Damage (save for half damage). A blast of cold inflicts hit-point damage, half if the target makes a saving throw or similar avoidance check. Unlike fire, cold damage doesn't usually risk much collateral damage to items and equipment. Cold damage can include such things as blasting particles of ice, or visibility-obscuring snow.
Cold Damage (unusual collateral damage). Cold temperature normally doesn't affect items or substances - at least, not in the traditional "save for half damage" type of attack. Cold attacks causing an unusual type of collateral damage are thus quite memorable, because they're a bit unexpected. A few possibilities include: metal is chilled and causes damage for more than one round: potions or other liquids freeze with some sort of random or unexpected effect; torch fire freezes; leather has a risk of turning brittle and breaking, etc.
Command Plants or Animals. The monster can command nearby plants or animals to serve as his allies. If the monster is a plant-monster, it may have a specific type of slave-plant (possibly a weaker monster-type with different abilities) that it can command or animate. A more powerful monster might be a general plant-lord type, or perhaps it can command any sort of fungus but not other types of plants. Animal-controlling monsters, as with plant-controllers, might be limited to specific types of animals (mammals, reptiles, etc) or might have a particular type of animal they breed, control, or live in symbiosis with. In some cases, animal or plant controllers (especially the ones with a specific type of ally) can turn their victims into that kind of plant or animal. 
Constitution Loss. The attack drains one or more points of constitution from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the victim reaches a constitution score of 0 as a result of successive attacks, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker, or might remain alive as the attacker's mental slave. Another possibility is that the victim just dies, and a third possibility is that restoring the lost points becomes harder - what might have returned naturally is now a permanent condition requiring spells or divine intervention to reverse. Note that the drain might be temporary or permanent - this is up to you as a matter of how powerful you want the monster to be.
Curse (strategic). A "curse" can be almost anything, but what distinguishes it is that it responds to particular spells that remove... curses. If the party happens to have a "remove curse" spell handy, the special attack's power can easily be negated, unless this is a super-powered curse of some kind. Strategic curses are long-term curses that don't necessarily have much immediate effect in a combat, but have repercussions in the game outside the realm of combat. Some of these are purely cosmetic, and would be reflected only in the role-playing environment: a change in skin color, a long nose (perhaps it grows when you tell a lie!), a change in gender - all of these are excellent curses even though they don't affect the game itself. Other strategic curses are those which restrict decision-making in between combats if they aren't dealt with. Examples of this type of curse include a "quest to obtain the grail" or "give half your treasure to the evil cult."
Curse (tactical). A "curse" can be almost anything, but what distinguishes it is that it responds to particular spells that remove... curses. If the party happens to have a "remove curse" spell handy, the special attack's power can easily be negated, unless this is a super-powered curse of some kind. A "tactical" curse is one that focuses on the basic die rolls and mechanisms of the game *'strategic" curses focus more on flavor or other aspects of the game outside the combat rules. Tactical curses will generally accomplish one or more of the following: (1) lower an ability score, (2) cause random actions (running, singing, etc), possibly triggered by a low attack roll or with a risk of onset when the character attempts a particular action, (3) cause a specific sort of action, such as attacking allies or sleeping, when the curse is triggered by a bad die roll or other triggering event, (4) cause a penalty to attack rolls, damage rolls, and/or saving throws, (S) give the character a small chance of sudden death when attempting certain actions like running, attacking, casting a spell, walking into the light, etc, (6) cause a small amount of hit point damage whenever the character undertakes a particular action such as running, etc (see the preceding list), (7) change the character's location when certain events take place, either by teleportation or by uncontrollable or random movement, (8) cause a chance of paralysis or sleep When the character undertakes a particular action (see the preceding list), cause the character to lose a level or a particular number of experience points (9) remove or restrict spell casting ability. (10) reduce the character's movement. Other tactical curses can include transformations such as polymorph or other spell-like effects such as a charm.
Dangerous Barriers. The monster can create barriers such as walls of thorns, walls of fire, bubbles of temporary levitation, banks of whining blades, or whatever. Here are lists of possible types of barriers and possible types of composition. Types: wall, circle, Spiral, shrinking circle, cube, moving wall, short fence, cloud, thread, rope. Composition: fire, cold, ice, frost, earth, water, gas, blades, swords, daggers, spears, thorns, magical force, mental force, mental domination, aversion, disease, poison, insanity, sound. song, screams, nausca, fear, pincers, stingers, claws, confusion.
Death (magic or poison). The special attack uses death magic or poison to cause instant death if the target fails a saving throw. Altematively, targets with a minimum number of levels or hit dice might be immune to the attack.
Death (progressive attribute score loss). If the target fails a saving throw, the result is likely to be death. The victim loses a point of some particular attribute score (strength, dexterity, constitution, intelligence, wisdom, or charisma) periodically until the score reaches zero and death results. The process can be stopped in different ways depending on the nature of the attack. If it is a curse, it can be removed, if it is a form of poison it can be neutralized, if it is a form of disease it can be cured. If it is none of the above, then there might still be a "folkloric" antidote - an action that negales the attack for no scientific reason. The most obvious example of a folkloric antidote is to kill the attacker before the draining process is complete. Less obvious examples might include stopping to drink lots of water, divesting oneself of all metal objects, etc. Folkloric antidotes might completely stop the draining process or they might just hold it in abeyance.
Death (progressive dexterity loss). If the target fails a saving throw, the result is likely to be death. The victim loses a point of dexterity periodically until dexterity reaches zero and death results. The process can be stopped in different ways depending on the nature of the attack. If it is a curse, it can be removed, if it is a form of poison it can be neutralized, if it is a form of disease it can be cured. If it is none of the above, then there might still be a "folkloric" antidote - an action that negates the attack for no scientific reason. The most obvious example of a folkloric antidote is to kill the attacker before the draining process is complete. Less obvious examples might include stopping to drink lots of water, divesting oneself of all metal objects, etc. Folkloric antidotes might completely stop the draining process or they might just hold it in abeyance.
Dehydrate, Desiccate, Suck Fluids. This special attack sucks blood or dehydrates the victim (possibly all the way into powder). For "standard" bloodsucking, the process starts only with a successful to hit roll and then the attacker causes automatic damage thereafter without rolling to hit. Consider, though, the following ideas: (1) a "ranged" attack of this nature might be pulling bodily fluids out into a mist for the monster to collect later, (2) a failed saving throw might mean that the ongoing damage continues until either the attacker or the defender dies, (3) hit points don't need to be the "measure" of the damage; it might be the character's constitution score or some other number that's used for the measurement, (4) the "vampire" might gain strength (probably hit points) from draining a victim's fluids, (5) if the attack involves a tube or some other physical connection, you might want to consider this as an opportunity to add some interesting tactics to the battle - perhaps the tube has hit points and an armor class to allow the connection to be severed quickly, (6) perhaps the fluid is being replaced with something else like eggs or control-fluid.
Dexterity Loss. The attack drains one or more points of dexterity from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the vic- tim reaches a dexterity of 0, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker (this is common with undead, but a bit weird when dexterity is the attribute score being drained). One explanation for death at 0 dexterity is that the body's internal systems (circulatory, etc) are no longer working in time with each other.
Dimensional (imprisonment). This type of attack imprisons the victim - to some degree - in another dimension or reality. This can be interpreted a number of different ways. Perhaps suspended animation or catatonia can be caused by some sort of dimensional disjunction. Perhaps the imprisonment leaves an incorporeal echo on the material plane - and it might still be able to use spells or mental powers. Perhaps the imprisonment's only effect is to slow the victim's movement rate (your feet are mired in one dimension, but the rest of you is still free..
Dimensional (phasing). This type of special attack taps other dimensions of time and space to screw around with the opposition movement. The victim is affected with some type of dimensional movement (whether because of a disease, a poison, a curse, the opening of a synchronicity with the eighth dimension, a coating of dimensional frictionlessness, or whatever). The effect is most likely some sort of randomization of the victim's movement, although it might also involve moving through solid substances (or even being able to move faster through solids than through air).
Disease. The special attack causes a disease. Diseases can be fatal or non-fatal, can be quick-onset or slow-onset, and can cause all kinds of different symptoms while the disease runs its course. Symptoms could include losing the ability to cast spells, a penalty on saving throws or attack rolls, or whatever other interesting conditions you can dream up.
Drain Experience (experience points). The special attack causes the victim to lose experience points. Most likely, this is either an undead creature or a creature that can affect the victim's memory. A third possibility, related to memory, is a creature with some ability to manipulate time or aging. Brain-creatures, leech-creatures, undead creatures, and dimensional creatures thus tend to be the prime candidates for this sort of power. If you've got a good idea that falls outside those prime candidates, though, go for it.
Drain Experience (level). The special attack causes the victim to lose one (or possibly two) levels of experience. This is generally a feature of undead creatures that suck away the victim's life energy (as opposed to creatures who affect memory, likely sucking away a set number of experience points rather than a level). A monster with this sort of level drain should be associated with life (death) force in some way if it is not undead.
Electrical Damage (affects action). The attack causes electrical damage to the target, but there's also a special effect involved - if the victim fails some sort of check (morale, saving throw, percentile chance, etc) he takes some action in response to or as a result of the shock. Since electricity affects the brain, all kinds of actions are credible here - it's a much broader set of possibilities than what a fire attack might make someone do. Possibilities include: random actions for some number of rounds, loss of bodily coordination (reflected with combat penalties), mental disorientation (affecting spell casting and possibly even in some really cool ways like making the character risk casting the wrong spell), temporary paralysis, etc.
Electrical Damage (causes condition). In addition to the damage caused by the attack, there is a chance that the victim will also have a "condition" lingering after the electrical shock. This is similar to electrical damage that causes an action, but bear with me a moment. Possibilities include: the victim has a state charge built up that will cause damage to the next person he touches (not good if you're the cleric, but actually pretty cool if you're the fighter and some of the enemies aren't immune to electricity); the victim cannot hold an object in his hands without dropping it; the victim is stunned, twitching, or knocked out from the electric shock, etc.
Electrical Damage (hit or miss). The attack causes electrical damage, but a successful saving throw means that the target incur no damage. In other words, the saving throw functions as a to-hit roll and if it is successful the attack missed. Another way of handling this is to require an attack roll for the attack itself (and then don't allow a saving throw). 
Electrical Damage (progressive). The victim takes electrical damage, but continues to take damage in later combat rounds until the series of electrical shocks has run its course. Exactly what effect the continuing damage will have is up to you. It would almost certainly prevent spell casting, but might also create penalties on saving throws, attack rolls, and/or movement rate.
Electrical Damage (save for half damage). The attack causes electrical damage, reduced by half with a successful saving throw, In general, lightning or electrical attacks don't have the same sort of "save or burn" collateral damage as fire attacks - or at least. they're not generally as severe. Electrical attacks are often made unique by the way the electricity moves around. Consider the possibility of the electricity jumping from one target to another, the possibility of it reflecting off a wall or other surface. 
Electricity (special). In this case, the electricity involved in the special attack isn't normal electricity - it's more of a special effect for something else. Just as magical fires can do all sorts of things rather than just burn, a strike of magical lightning or a bolt of power can be the "visual candy" for a multitude of different sorts of attacks completely unrelated to real-world electricity. Possible effects include: lowering an ability score, acting randomly, suffering combat penalties, following enemy orders, floating up into the air, losing the ability to act, losing the ability to cast spells, functioning as a lower-level character, running away, suffering saving throw penalties, suffering hallucinations, and suffering from a heightened emotion such as rage or Sorrow,
Elemental Vortex. The special attack creates (or animates) a whirlwind of air, fire, water, or earth. In each case, the attack causes damage from a combination of smashing into the target plus the inherent properties of the element being used. Thus, fire would cause additional fire damage, water might drown the victim, air might pick the victim up and move him around, and earth could possibly suffocate the victim but is more likely just going to do more damage with the churning impact. More powerful monsters might create vortices with more interesting results including collateral damage to equipment, moving the target a long way, pulling the target down beneath the water or air, pulling the target into the elemental plane itself, stunning the target for some period of time, causing the target to drop items, etc.
Emotion (despondency or sorrow). This special attack induces intense despondency or sorrow in the victim. As is the case with all special attacks involving emotion, creating the details of the special attack is a two-step process concerning (1) who is affected and (2) what happens when someone is affected. Here are some ideas about who might or might not be vulnerable: (1) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected but those of higher level are at no risk, (2) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected and those of higher level are affected if they fail a saving throw, (3) members of certain races or classes may be immune or might be particularly vulnerable, (4) anyone with intelligence less than a certain number might be automatically affected or might be immune, (5) those who are particularly close to the monster (or the locus of the emotion-effect) have a penalty on the saving throw, or, conversely, everyone beyond a certain distance gets a bonus, (6) the effect begins as a very low chance but increases as the combat progresses (a series of saving throws or some other "check" with increasing penalties). As a list of ideas for the effect of despondency, consider the following: (1) immobilized with sorrow, regret, grief, or ennui; (2) all die rolls are made with a penalty, (3) character departs to go and repair his miserable life, (4) character decides to end it all, and rolls an attack against himself, (5) character blames someone else for his miserable condition, and attacks them instead of the monster, (6) character risks dropping dead from melancholy. One interesting idea is that if the character escapes from this effect, he might be granted a bonus to attack the monster, in revenge. Players adore it when a special attack gets turned around into a bonus for them.
Emotion (fear). The monster has a horrific appearance, changes into a horrific appearance, mentally induces fear, or has some other way of causing fear. Fear can be portrayed in a number of different ways, in terms of the attack's effect, and there are also a number of different ways to determine who is vulnerable to the attack. Here are some ideas about who might or might not be vulnerable: (1) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected but those of higher level are at no risk, (2) any- one under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected and those of higher level are affected if they fail a saving throw, (3) members of certain races or classes may be immune or might be particularly vulnerable, (4) anyone with intelligence less than a certain number might be automatically affected or might be immune, (5) those who are particularly close to the monster (or the locus of the fear-effect) have a penalty on the saving throw, or, conversely, everyone beyond a certain distance gets a bonus, (6) the fear effect begins as a very low chance but increases as the combat progresses (a series of saving throws or some other "check" with increasing penalties). As a list of ideas for the effect of fear, consider the following: (1) an ability score is vastly reduced until the fear goes away, (2) those affected act randomly according to a table you prepare, (3) those affected suffer combat penalties to hit and/or on damage, (4) those affected follow orders given by the source of fear, (5) those affected are paralyzed with fear, (6) those affected function as a lower-level character, (7) running away (8) chance of death from fear. 
Emotion (love or happiness). This special attack induces the emotion of love or happiness in the victim - probably directed toward the monster using the special attack, but possibly as a way of immobilizing the target. As is the case with all special attacks involving emotion, creating the details of the special attack is a two-step process concerning (1) who is affected and (2) what happens when someone is affected. Here are some ideas about who might or might not be vulnerable: (1) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected but those of higher level are at no risk, (2) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected and those of higher level are affected if they fail a saving throw, (3) members of certain races or classes may be immune or might be particularly vulnerable, (4) anyone with intelligence less than a certain number might be automatically affected or might be immune, (5) those who are particularly close to the monster (or the locus of the emotion-effect) have a penalty on the saving throw, or, conversely, everyone beyond a certain distance gets a bonus, (6) the effect begins as a very low chance but increases as the combat progresses (a series of saving throws or some other "check" with increasing penalties). As a list of ideas for the effect of love/happiness, consider the following: (1) the victim drops everything to grovel before, speak poetry to, or praise the monster (or some other focus including other characters or shiny objects), (2) the victim tries to assist and protect the monster. (3) the victim changes sides and follows the monster's orders.
Emotion (rage). This special attack induces rage, either by taunting, mental manipulation, or temporary insanity. As is the case with all special attacks involving emotion, creating the details of the special attack is a two-step process concerning (1) who is affected and (2) what happens when someone is affected. Here are some ideas about who might be vulnerable: (1) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected but those of higher level are at no risk, (2) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected and those of higher level are affected if they fail a saving throw, (3) members of certain races or classes may be immune or might be particularly vulnerable, (4) anyone with intelligence less than a certain number might be automatically affected or might be immune, (S) those who are particularly near the monster (or the locus of the rage-effeci) have a penalty on the saving throw, or, conversely, everyone beyond a certain distance gets a bonus, (6) the rage effect begins as a very low chance but increases as the combat progresses (a series of saving throws or some other "check" with increasing penalties). Às a list of ideas for the effect of rage, consider the following: (1) victim attacks with melee weapons and cannot voluntarily retreat. (2) the rage is a distraction, causing combat penalties and restricting spell casting, (3) the rage gives a bonus on one hand (damage rolls, perhaps) but there is a more dangerous penalty associated with it as well, such as a penalty on saving throws, attack rolls inability to retreat, inability to do anything more subtle than a frontal assault, etc. (4) the rage is so fierce that the victim is actually paralyzed by it. It is possible that the "rage is not automatically going to be directed at the monster using the special attack. either: it might cause members of the party to attack each other, or it might be an "attack" that's used to strengthen the monster's minions and allies (in which case, it might be a benefit with no particular downside, like a to-hit bonus).
Energy Vortex. Similar to the "Elemental Vortex," this is an attack in which the monster calls forth a whirlwind of some kind of "energy," including electricity, magical force, or mental force. The victim would suffer damage, but the distinguishing feature of this sort of attack is either that the victim is picked up and moved by the attack or is trapped inside it until he escapes or the duration expires (duration might be as long as the monster concentrates on maintaining the effect, which is not good for the victim).
Fire (special). In this case, the fire involved in the special attack isn't normal fire - it's more of a special effect for something else. Magical fires can do all sorts of things rather than just burn, so this is a very broad category. Possible effects include: lowering an ability score, acting randomly, suffering combat penalties, following enemy orders, floating up into the air, losing the ability to act. losing the ability to cast spells, functioning as a lower-level character, running away, suffering saving throw penalties, suffering hallucinations, and suffering from a heightened emotion such as rage or sorrow. The fire doesn't have to be magical - it could just be that this particular monster's fire-breath causes people to flee, for instance. On the other hand, the whole "fire" thing might be little more than a special effect for an attack that's really all about floating the opponent helplessly into the air. 
Fire Damage (affects action). The attack causes fire damage to the target, but there's also a special effect involved - if the victim fails some sort of check (morale, saving throw, percentile chance, etc) he reflexively takes some action in response to the fire. These could include: fleeing for a couple of combat rounds, trying to put out the fire, or writhing in pain.
Fire Damage (hit or miss). The attack causes fire damage, but a successful saving throw means that the target incurs no damage. In other words, the saving throw functions as a to-hit roll and if it is successful the attack missed. Another way of handling this is to require an attack roll for the attack itself (and then don't allow a saving throw). Items in the area may take collateral damage (a saving throw or a "hot" effect), but only if the target failed the saving throw - because if the target makes the saving throw, the items were presumably not exposed to the fire in the first place.
Fire Damage (progressive). The victim takes fire damage, but continues to take damage in later combat rounds until the fire has run its course. The attack is most likely made with a burning substance as opposed to a burst of flame - the monster spat burning oil, phosphorus, Greek fire, napalm, or lots of burning coals - or some sort of magically lingering fire. It is the continued burning of the substance that causes the ongoing damage. Exactly what effect the continuing damage will have is up to you. It would almost certainly prevent spell casting, but might also create penalties on saving throws, attack rolls, and/or movement rate.
Fire Damage (save for half damage). The attack causes fire damage, reduced by half with a successful saving throw. Fire may also cause collateral damage to items, depending on how "strong" you want the attack to be. If the fire causes collateral damage, you could reflect this in a variety of ways: (1) require flammable items to make a saving throw or be ruined (or ignite), (2) decide that certain items such as cloth will automatically - no saving throw - smolder (and cause damage to the wearer) unless time is spent extinguishing them, (3) take into account that metal retains heat and build in some process to handle "hot" armor and weapons. The basic form of a fire attack, though, is simply to require a saving throw for vulnerable items - whether or not the target took half damage because he made a saving throw. 
Hallucinations or Illusions (basic). The special attack causes hallucinations or illusions for those who are affected. The illusions might be bright colors, things that appear to be changing form, or whatever - what's important isn't the exact nature of the illusion but the effect it has on general combat (more complicated illusions are treated in a different category). The easiest way to come up with basic illusion/hallucination attacks is to determine first what they do, and then figure out what sort of illusion might create that effect. Possible results of a basic hallucination are as follows: (1) lowering an ability score while the hallucination is operating. (2) acting randomly according to some table of actions, (3) suffering combat penalties to hit, (4) following enemy orders or orders generated randomly by a sound-hallucination, (5) losing the ability to take any actions due to fascination, nausea, confusion, etc, (6) functioning as a lower-level character as a general way of reflecting that the character is distracted, (7) running away or moving randomly in response to the hallucinated reality, or (8) suffering saving throw penalties. As a basic example of thinking up the illusion based on the result: a hallucination which causes an attack penalty of -2 might be an illusion which blurs the outlines of the character's sight or shifts his vision slightly to the side of where things actually are. In addition to the combat-type basic illusions, there is another category of basic "camouflage-type" illusions used by ambush-monsters - these illusions don't necessarily create any sort of combat modifier, but they make the monster seem innocuous until it is ready to attack or lead the party toward some attractive-looking goal where the monster has an advantage. These would include monsters that are invisible, monsters that can make themselves look like stone walls or statues, a monster that can make people think it's a treasure chest, etc.
Hallucinations or Illusions (complex). The special attack causes a hallucination or illusion that is too complex to be characterized with a modifier to die rolls or a table of random actions. An illusion of mirror images (giving the monster's opponents the chance to be attacking the "wrong" monster) is one example; another example is a hallucination that might cause damage to the victim, and a third example is a hallucination that creates the image of a deep pit between the monster and the victim. In general, these fall into the following categories: illusions that create false enemies, obscure or change the appearance of the enemies. create illusionary obstacles, create illusionary dangers (the appearance of a spell being cast, fake attacks, or some other type of illusionary assault), or otherwise prevent the victim from getting true information about the tactical situation. Exactly how these are handled is up to you - if the illusion is unusual, you might choose not to follow the "official" method for handling illusions. if your game has one. There is a wide variety of interesting ways to handle illusions, including saving throws, a "check" against intelligence or wisdom, or simply telling the player what the character sees and leaving it to the player to respond. In some cases, depending on the illusion, the way to handle it will be obvious; in other cases, the same illusion treated differently might as well be a different kind of special attack. Feel free to let your imagination roam: what sort of illusion might you create if you were a monster? One last point: there is a big difference between a monster that creates one specific illusion (mirror images, for example and one that can create all kinds of illusions in response to the circumstances. The latter type of monster is very powerful, and you might want to think of its abilities in terms of spells rather than a general ability to create illusions.
Ice (blasting). This sort of attack is partially about the cold temperature, but there's a "blasting" component to it as well. Such effects could include: knocking the target backward, knocking the target prone, blowing items out of the target's hands, etc.
Ice (immobilizing). This sort of attack isn't all about the temperature; it will probably cause some hit point damage, but the main feature of the attack is that it uses frozen water to immobilize the target. It might be creation of a block of ice (*it froze the air itself!"), or it might be a matter of breathing a storm of ice particles that create a block, wall, or chunk. If the monster is very powerful or highly magical, the ice might have other dangerous properties - suffocation, ongoing damage, or a chance of instant death from hypothermia all being possibilities.
Immobilize (by an activity). Although many of the special attacks listed here would have the effect of immobilizing the victim, this entry addresses immobilization-type attacks as a group. Here is a series of activities which could cause a character to be effectively immobilized: dancing, twitching, laughing, vomiting, nausea, confusion, jumping, floating, talking, scratching, begging for merely, thinking, arguing, holding one's breath, hiding, and meditating.
Implant Eggs or Young. This special attack implants the victim with eggs or larvae, or in some way makes him into a host for the attacker's reproduction - which can include a magical transformation into the same sort of creature (possibly independent, possibly a slave of the attacker). There are several possible variables to work with when designing this sort of special attack. First. the trigger - it might be that a successful hit automatically begins the process, it might be that there is a saving throw required after each hit, it might be that each hit has a percentage chance of causing the effect, or it might be that the "egg-laying" effect only happens when the victim is dead, knocked unconscious, or rendered helpless by the attack. Secondly, the remedy - the process would be counteracted differently depending on whether the "eggs" are considered a poison, a curse, or a disease. Thirdly, the gestation period - it might run from only a couple of combat rounds to more than a week in duration (giving the adventurers much more time to find a remedy back in the civilized world). Fourthly, the effects during gestation - perhaps the victim remains unconscious or in suspended animation until the eggs hatch (or his body alters, or the implanted creature cats its way out, or whatever), perhaps he can wake up and function normally until his sudden demise as a character, or perhaps you can think of one or two "stages" of the process in which the victim becomes weaker or changes as a result of being used as a host organism.
Insanity (strategic). "Strategic" insanity, as opposed to "tactical" insanity, is a form of insanity in which the effects aren't bundled up in the game rules, but are reflected in the roleplaying and in the non-combat side of the game. Examples include various phobias, aversions, and manias. Hysterical blindness is another good example - a condition that can suddenly appear when the character is under stress.
Insanity and Confusion (tactical). The special attack drives the victim temporarily or permanently insane. The characteristic example of this sort of attack is confusion, which causes victims to act according to a random table.
Intelligence Loss. The attack drains one or more points of intelligence from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the victim reaches an intelligence of 0 as a result of successive attacks, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker or become a mindless host for the attacker's larval offspring (mind-leeches, or whatever). Another possibility is that the victim just dies, and a third possibility is that restoring the lost points becomes harder - what might have returned naturally is now a permanent condition requiring spells or divine intervention to reverse. Note that the drain might be temporary or permanent - this is up to you as a matter of how powerful you want the monster to be.
Light, Dark, and Shadow. The monster uses light, darkness, or shadow as a special attack. Consider some of the following: (1) a floating weapon or dangerous coalescence of light or darkness, which attacks once brought into being, (2) creates darkness lo chectively blind the enemy, (3) blasts of damaging light, (4) the monster can compress and concentrate light or darkness to make some interesting form of attack.
Luck. This special attack gives the victim bad luck (reflected with die roll penalties). The question is: what sort of bad luck? Is it just a curse that makes you inflict less damage, or is it a wide-ranging effect that doesn't just make you miss opponents but also means you always get a fly in your beer at the local tavern? In addition to whatever specific die roll modifier this attack causes, some monsters might deliver bad luck in very specific categories: the beautiful woman type monster might deliver a curse of bad luck with the opposite gender; the earth-elemental type monster might deliver bad luck involving gemstones; the dryad-like creature might give bad luck outdoors, or involving wooden items.
Magic Drain (items). The special attack drains magic items of their power (and might or might not give the monster additional power as a result). Items can be drained temporarily or permanently, and they can also be drained in a way that gives them a chance to fail when used as opposed to being completely "dead."
Magic Drain (spells). The special attack removes, to some degree or other, a spell caster's ability to cast spells. The attack might remove a single spell from the caster's mental inventory, it might remove all spells, it might remove particular spells, it might remove spells of a certain level or higher (or lower), or it might lower the caster's effective level of experience. Alternatively, the attack might cause all the caster's spells to function sub-normally, or create a chance of failure when the caster tries to cast a spell. In the case of powerful monsters, draining spell power from a caster might also strengthen the monster; giving it extra hit dice, hit points, or a combat bonus. In the case of extremely powerful monsters, whatever spell was drained might actually go to the monster and give it the ability to cast that spell.
Magic or Mental Force (slam). The special attack uses magical force or telekinesis to smash the victim into something, or smash something into the victim. This includes hitting the victim with magic force alone (i..., no actual object). This is a broad category: the attacker might or might not need to make a to-hit roll, and the defender might or might not have the chance to avoid the blow with a saving throw or other means of lessening the damage. More powerful versions of this attack might do one or more of the following: push back the victim, hurl back the victim, make the victim drop items in hand, stun the victim, knock the victim unconscious, or even have a chance to kill the victim outright.
Memory (steal ability). This special attack allows the monster to use some ability or skill known by the target. The most obvious example of this is casting a spell, but combat bonuses or other advantages could be targeted by such an attack. Even the victim's target number for saving throws, for example, could be "stolen" if it is more favorable than the monster's normal target number. It is also possible for a memory-affecting special attack to target only the magically related memories of a target, stripping away spells or spell casting abilities but leaving combat and other skills unaffected. This more specific type of memory attack would generally be found in creatures with some relation to wizardly magic (e.g., created in a wizard's lab, bred to fight wizards, etc), a relation to divine or unholy power (e.g., the monster is a remnant of some ancient divine retribution, is a parasite of divine power, etc), or feeds specifically on magic power.
Memory Drain (experience). Memory-draining special attacks are generally targeted at the victim's level or experience points. The attack would either remove (temporarily or permanently, depending on how you decide to design it) one or two levels of experience or a set number of experience points. Movement Inhibited (external). Some sort of very weak binding or entangling inhibits the victim's movements. Victim suffers one or more of the following: a penalty to hit, a penalty to armor class, and/or reduction in spell casting ability (perhaps only "easy" spells, perhaps a chance of spell failure, perhaps an increase in casting time). There is probably also some reduction in the victim's movement rate. The nature of the binding force can include: filaments of magical energy, thickened air, vacuum power or wind, clothing becoming brittle or cumbersome, etc.
Movement Prevented (external). Some sort of binding or entangling prevents the victim from moving. The severity of the attack can range from complete helplessness to merely being held in one place (but otherwise able to take actions). The nature of the binding force can include: filaments of magical energy, thickened air, a coagulated blob of magical glue, a natural adhesive, swarms of infinitesimal spirits holding the victim in place, the stones of the floor grabbing his ankles, a spider web, or animated
vines or tentacles.
Open Planar Gate. The monster can open a gate into some other reality. This could be an escape mechanism, a way of summoning allies, or a way of blasting the area with weirdness from the other plane. Even a fairly mundane little mole-like critter becomes interesting if it can burrow into the tenth dimension and come out behind you. Indeed, if it can open a gate through time, it might be able to come out and attack you simultaneously from two different places (of course, then it would disappear for a few moments since it used itself as a special attack a few moments earlier……). If a planar gate is used to summon allies (again, keep in mind that even minor monsters - like a planar ant - might be able to summon more of their own Kind). If the gate is an escape mechanism, perhaps it's possible for the adventurers to follow the monster into some strange and alien realm where it makes its home - and possibly has a different bodily form.
Paralysis. The special attack causes paralysis for a random number of combat rounds, minutes, or hours. A very powerful monster might cause permanent paralysis as a form of curse, poison, or disease.
Poison (lethal). Lethal poisons cause death, but death is not necessarily immediate. A slow-Onset poison might cause some sort of debilitating effects during the onset period (such as the victim being incapacitated with pain, or becoming unconscious), or it might simply cause a progressive weakness that isn't reflected in terms of the game's numbers... until the character drops dead.
Poison (non-lethal). Non-lethal poisons can have a variety of effects: some might be temporary effects until the effects of the poison have worn off, but others might be permanent debilities until some sort of magic has been used to reverse the damage caused by the poison.
Raise, Create, or Summon Undead. Undead monsters aren't the only ones who can use undead monsters as allies or minions. More importantly, not all undead must necessarily be undead - a statement which obviously requires clarification. Animated bodies need not be the result of black magic (which is the case for, say, the standard zombie). But what about bodies animated or controlled by a plant - is this technically an undead zombie? Will it necessarily work in exactly the same way as an undead zombie just because it's a moving human corpse? If your answer is "no," then you've just opened up the realm of the plant-undead, the virally-controlled undead, the mechanically-controlled undead, the psionically-controlled undead all kinds of creepy minions and transformations that can be used to develop monsters and their abilities.
Senses (overstimulate). The five senses are sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell, and each of them could be overstimulated by a monster by means of a special attack. I don't necessarily mean that the monster is hideously ugly, sounds awful, feels awful, tastes awful or smells awful, although if one of those trips off an inspiration, then run with it. What's meant here is that the monster affects one of the victim's senses to make it too powerful for effective use. For example, if the special attack affects the victim's sense of smell, all smells might become so powerful that the victim falls prey to nausea. If the attack affects sight, the victim might be overcome by light sensitivity or have vision so microscopic that he can't perceive what's happening around him. Since there is a wide variety of possibly "effects" stemming from sensory overstimulation, here is a quick list of possibilities to get the mind working: (1) temporarily lowering an ability score (or all ability scores). (2) acting randomly, (3) suffering combat penalties. (4) losing the ability to act due to nausea, fascination, or confusion, (5) functioning as a lower-level character, (6) running away or moving randomly, (7) suffering saving throw penalties, (8) dropping any items held in hand.
Senses (remove capability). The five senses are sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. Only sight and hearing have much effect in game terms, so I've just lumped them all together into one entry on this table. The special attack causes blindness (or makes lots of things invisible), or it causes deafness (or keeps sound from functioning in the are) - alternatively, it removes the sense of touch, taste or smell from the target (or negates feeling, taste or smells within the area of effect).
Size and Density. The special attack changes the size or density of the victim (and a beneficial form of it might also be usable to help allies if the monster is a leader-type). Growing and shrinking allies and enemies respectively is a fairly obvious use of this sort of ability, and it's easy to generate a set of modifiers as required. Manipulating density and weight is a bit more open ended. Can the monster make people weightless so they can levitate or be levitated? How about too heavy to move? Perhaps the effect only works on metal or some other substance.
Sleep and Catatonia. The special attack causes magical sleep, normal sleep, catatonia, or suspended animation. In some cases the effect might be automatic against targets with a lower number of hit dice (or levels), or it might permit a saving throw. It could also affect only those with intelligence or wisdom lower than a target number, or affect only a certain total number of hit dice within an area. Onset is probably immediate, but it would also be possible that there's an intermediate, "sleepy" phase in which the victim is still functioning with combat penalties before actually falling into the magical sleep. Powerful sleep-type attacks might induce this "sleepy" condition even if the victim makes a successful saving throw. In some cases, particular dreams, or dreams sent by the attacker, might be an important part of the attack in addition to putting the victim to sleep.
Slow. This sort of special attack slows down the victim, probably to half speed at everything, but possibly only in terms of movement or attack speed - it depends on how the monster does it. The effect might just be magic which slows down opponents, it might be related to manipulation of time or other dimensions, or it might be that the monster produces an external cause like glue or webs that slow people down.
Sound (action-causing). The monster speaks or makes sounds that compel certain actions in the unfortunate listener. This isn't control by the monster, because the monster can't fine-tune anything, but in many ways the effect is the same. Examples include: approaching the monster, becoming paralyzed, running away, removing armor, attacking, hiding, etc.
Sound (control). Many folkloric monsters use sound to control others - whether by means of song, speech, or spell. There are many ways to represent different degrees of mental control, and many ways to determine whether a person is affected. For example, degrees of mental control include: (1) victim follows all commands like a puppet, (2) victim sees the controller as his friend but will not put himself into mortal danger, (3) controller can only command the victim to perform certain actions, but other actions don't fall within the scope of the magic - for example, a monster that can "call" the victim to a certain place, but can't order the victim to attack its enemies. In terms of ways to determine if a target is affected, here is another list of possibilities: (1) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected but those of higher level are at no risk, (2) anyone under a certain number of hit dice is automatically affected and those of higher level are affected if they fail a saving throw, (3) members of certain races or classes may be immune or might be particularly vulnerable, (4) anyone with intelligence less than a certain number might be automatically affected or might be immune, depending on the nature of the sound/persuasion being used, (5) anyone within hearing gets a saving throw, (6) those who are particularly close to the sound have a penalty on the saving throw, or, conversely, everyone beyond a certain distance gets a bonus. The duration of sound-control attacks is another factor that can be used to create different types of challenges: in some cases, the control might end as soon as the sound ends, but in other cases the control might be established irrevocably.
Sound (distraction). The monster uses speech, sound, or song to distract or immobilize its enemies. It may be that the sound itself is so discordant or so beautiful that it creates the distraction, or it could be that the sound evokes such a strong emotional response that the victim acts strangely or fights poorly. To run through these variables: if the sound or speech evokes an emotion, these could include joy, rage, hate, greed, fear, or adoration. The effects of such sound attacks could include: (1) temporarily lowering an ability score, (2) acting randomly, (3) suffering combat penalties, (4) following enemy orders, (5) losing the ability to act, (6) losing the ability to cast spells, (7) functioning as a lower-level character, (8) running away, (9) suffering saving throw penalties, (10) suffering hallucinations - or a combination of more than one of the above.
Sound Damage (save for half damage). Sonic damage is a little hokey, but every once in a while it works (particularly with monsters based on real-world animals that use echolocation or are known for producing a characteristic sound. Sonic damage ordinarily wouldn't cause collateral damage to items or equipment, but glass is a natural candidate for being damaged in this way. I recommend avoiding the concept of sonic damage - sound works much better for mental control, combat penalties, preventing spell casting, and other such special effects than it does with the concept of taking actual hit point damage. At all costs, avoid thinking of sound damage in terms of vibration and frequency, and start thinking of it in terms of song and screech - or you'll make a serious misstep in terms of the "feel" of a fantasy game. This is even true if the monster is from the "voids between the stars" or from an alternate high-tech universe.
Spell-like Abilities. The monster has a set group of abilities that function as spells, probably with a limited number of castings per day, per hour, per minute, or whatever. Unlike true spells, it may be that all monsters of this type have exactly the same spell-like abilities and can't change them from day to day (to my mind, this is what distinguishes "spell-like" from "spell," but what's important here isn't to create clean categories, it's to muddle things together for maximum creative boost). Spell like abilities are normally, but not necessarily, best when all the abilities are obviously related to something about the monster. A monster from the elemental plane of fire should have mostly fire type abilities, and (interestingly) it is the non-fire abilities that will tend to make it stand out in the players' minds. If a fire-genie has several fire abilities but can also use mind-control, that's very distinctive. But if it has too many non fire-related abilities, it may fail to be memorable.
Spells. The monster uses spells, or can use its special attack to deliver spells from a list identical to a magic-user of some defined level. Different monsters of the same type might have a different "selection" of spells.
Strange Chemical (affects items). The special attack releases or creates a chemical that affects non-living substances. The affected substance might be wood, leather, paper, fires, metal, water, air, potions, magical ink, hair - the choices are pretty wide- ranging. The chemical reaction either destroys the substance, makes it multiply, or changes it into something else - and the interesting part might be the side effect of the reaction, too, Many chemical reactions give off energy, suck energy out of the air, create gases, and do all kinds of strange things. Most likely, the chemical reaction will change the liquid/gas/solid composition of a substance, or change it into another form (iron to rust, leather to powder, wood to stone, etc). 
Strange Chemical (affects person). The attack creates a chemical reaction of some kind - either the chemical is sprayed onto the victim or the attacker's gaze causes chemicals in the victim's body to change, or whatever. This is a huge category of possibili- ties, because a "chemical reaction" can explain any result whatsoever, especially if you throw in words like "enzymes," and even more especially if the monster is from another plane of existence, another time, or from the "voids between the worlds." On the other hand, traditionally tolkloric monsters like griffons or dragons shouldn't have quasi-scientific explanations for what they do - use magic. Quasi-science is best for weirder monsters. Possibilities for strange chemical reactions include: lowering an ability score, acting randomly, suffering combat penalties, following enemy orders, floating up into the air, losing the ability to act, losing the ability to cast spells, functioning as a lower-level character, running away, suffering saving throw penalties, suffering hal- lucinations, and suffering from a heightened emotion such as rage or sorrow. Another way of looking at it is to think in terms of transformations: these could include skin turning into metal (or getting crusted with metal), gases that might be given off, medical symptoms (hemophilia), and factors such as weight, density, friction, adhesion, or release of energy. 
Strength Loss. The attack drains one or more points of strength from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the victim reaches a strength score of 0 as a result of successive attacks, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker, might just die, or might just lose the ability to naturally restore the lost strength points. Note that the drain might be temporary or permanent - this is up to you as a matter of how powerful you want the monster to be.
Stun. The attack uses some kind of "special effect" to stun its victims. Possibilities include noise, electric shock, an ugly appear- ance, mystical rays, visions of the future, hallucinations, powerful emotions, a floating symbol, light, and the old standby … powerful physical impact.
Stupidity. The victim does not actually lose points of intelligence or wisdom, but his thinking is impaired enough to cause penalties on various actions. Spell casting is probably prevented entirely, but a weak version of this sort of attack might only prevent casting "'harder" spells - or all spell casting might be subject to a chance of failure. This sort of attack could also lead to combat penalties: inability to use both a weapon and a shield at the same time, perhaps a to-hit penalty, etc. The way in which the attack causes stupidity could include distraction by overloading one of the victim's emotions (joy, rage, hate, greed, fear); an alchemical reaction (mysterious chemicals in the creature's spittle); the aftereffects of an electrical shock; some sort of mental numbing; sapping away the thoughts themselves; or a very weak poison, curse, or disease. The duration could range from only a couple of combat rounds to days in length.
Telekinesis and Teleportation. These special attacks are used to move enemies into bad places and smack them with things. Powerful monsters will be able to use the power more flexibly: for example, a brain-lord might be able to choose how far and when he wants to teleport himself of a target, but a brain-munchkin might teleport a specific distance at random intervals with no ability to teleport an enemy at all. 
Transformation (basic polymorph). The special attack turns the victim into an animal or some other form (such as an object). Stronger, smarter, or more magical creatures might have the ability to choose what form they will polymorph victims into, while other monsters might only have the ability to turn people specifically into frogs. The duration of the transformation is fairly important - does it end when the attacker is killed, does it end after a set duration, or is it permanent? Another consideration is whether the victim retains his own mind and the player if left controlling a rabbit) or whether the change is more than just a change in outer form. In some cases, the attack might be part of a one-two punch; if the monster controls all wolves, and can turn people into wolves, the attack can be used to turn enemies into allies - giving the other party members the dilemma of whether to attack their polymorphed-and-controlled ally.
Transformation (basic substance). This special attack changes one substance into another or changes the state of matter. (See Table 2-81)
Weakness. Victim suffers one or more of the following: a penalty to hit, a penalty to damage, and/ or the chance to drop any items he is holding. Actual strength score is not necessarily affected. The way in which the attack causes weakness could include over- loading one of the victim's emotions (joy, rage, hate, greed, fear); an alchemical reaction (mysterious chemicals in the creature's spittle); the aftereffects of an electrical shock; sapping of willpower; or a very weak poison, curse, or disease. The duration could range from only a couple of combat rounds to days in length.
Wisdom Loss. The attack drains one or more points of wisdom from the victim. The attacker may or may not gain a benefit from the drain (additional hit points, to-hit bonuses, etc) depending upon whether it seems to fit well with the concept. If the victim reaches a wisdom score of 0 as a result of successive attacks, one of several things might happen: the victim might die and become a creature similar to the attacker, or might remain alive as the attacker's mental slave. Another possibility is that the victim just dies, and a third possibility is that restoring the lost points becomes harder - What might have returned naturally is now a permanent condition requiring spells or divine intervention to reverse. Note that the drain might be temporary or permanent - this is up to you as a matter of how powerful you want the monster to be.